                                           Training Agents Inside of Scalable World Models
                                                                 Danijar Hafner*    Wilson Yan*    Timothy Lillicrap

                                         World models learn general knowledge from videos and simulate experience for training be-
                                         haviors in imagination, offering a path towards intelligent agents. However, previous world
                                         models have been unable to accurately predict object interactions in complex environments.
                                         We introduce Dreamer 4, a scalable agent that learns to solve control tasks by reinforcement
                                         learning inside of a fast and accurate world model. In the complex video game Minecraft,
                                         the world model accurately predicts object interactions and game mechanics, outperforming
arXiv:2509.24527v1 [cs.AI] 29 Sep 2025




                                         previous world models by a large margin. The world model achieves real-time interactive
                                         inference on a single GPU through a shortcut forcing objective and an efficient transformer
                                         architecture. Moreover, the world model learns general action conditioning from only a small
                                         amount of data, allowing it to extract the majority of its knowledge from diverse unlabeled
                                         videos. We propose the challenge of obtaining diamonds in Minecraft from only offline data,
                                         aligning with practical applications such as robotics where learning from environment inter-
                                         action can be unsafe and slow. This task requires choosing sequences of over 20,000 mouse
                                         and keyboard actions from raw pixels. By learning behaviors in imagination, Dreamer 4 is
                                         the first agent to obtain diamonds in Minecraft purely from offline data, without environment
                                         interaction. Our work provides a scalable recipe for imagination training, marking a step
                                         towards intelligent agents.


                                                                     Imagination Training Inside the World Model
                                         Agent task: Gather wood


                                         Agent task: Mine cobblestone


                                         Agent task: Craft stone pickaxe


                                         Agent task: Mine diamonds



                                                                                  Time
                                         Figure 1: Dreamer 4 learns to solve complex control tasks by reinforcement learning inside of its
                                         world model. We decode the imagined training sequences for visualization, showing that the world
                                         model has learned to simulate a wide range of game mechanics from low-level mouse and keyboard
                                         actions, including breaking blocks, using tools, and interacting with crafting tables.

                                         * Equal contribution. Google DeepMind, San Francisco, USA. Website: danijar.com/dreamer4       1
1. Introduction

To solve complex tasks in embodied environments, intelligent agents need to deeply understand the
world and choose successful actions. World models offer a promising approach towards this goal by
learning to predict the future outcomes of potential actions from the perspective of an agent, such
as a robot or a video game player. This way, world models equip agents with a deep understanding
of the world and the ability to choose actions by planning or reinforcement learning in imagination.
Moreover, world models can in principle learn from fixed datasets, allowing to train agents purely
in imagination without the need for online interaction. Optimizing behaviors offline is valuable for
many practical applications, such as robots in the physical world, where online interaction with a
partially trained agent is often unsafe.
World model agents, such as Dreamer 3, are among the best-performing and most robust rein-
forcement learning algorithms for games and robotics to date 1–6 . While these models are fast and
accurate for their narrow environments, their architecture lacks the ability to fit complex real world
distributions. Controllable video models, such as Genie 3, have been trained on diverse real video
and games and have accomplished diverse scene generation and simple interactions 7–12 . These
models are based on scalable architectures, such as diffusion transformers 13,14 . However, they still
struggle to learn the precise physics of object interactions and game mechanics, limiting their use-
fulness for training successful agents. Moreover, they often require many GPUs to simulate a single
scene in real time, further reducing their practicality for imagination training.
We introduce Dreamer 4, a scalable agent that solves control tasks by imagination training inside of
a fast and accurate world model. Dreamer 4 is the first agent to obtain diamonds in the challeng-
ing video game Minecraft purely from a standard offline dataset, without environment interaction.
Dreamer 4 leverages a novel shortcut forcing objective and an efficient transformer architecture to ac-
curately learn complex object interactions while enabling real-time human interaction and efficient
imagination training. We show that the world model accurately predicts a wide range of seman-
tic interactions in Minecraft, outperforming previous world models by a large margin. Moreover,
Dreamer 4 can be trained on large amounts of unlabeled videos and requires only a small amount of
videos paired with actions. This opens up the possibility of learning general world knowledge from
diverse web videos in the future, for which action labels are not available.
Our contributions are summarized as follows:

• We introduce Dreamer 4, a scalable agent that learns to solve challenging control tasks by imag-
  ination training inside of a world model.
• Dreamer 4 is the first agent to collect diamonds in Minecraft from only offline data, substantially
  improving over OpenAI’s VPT offline agent 15 despite using 100× less data.
• We introduce a high-capacity world model that achieves real-time inference on a single GPU
  through a shortcut forcing objective and an efficient transformer architecture.
• We show that the world model accurately predicts a wide range of object interactions and game
  mechanics in Minecraft, substantially outperforming previous world models.
• We show that the world model can learn from unlabeled videos and requires only a small amount
  of aligned data to learn action conditioning with strong generalization.
• An extensive ablation study measures the improvements of the objective and architecture.



                                                                                                     2
2. Background

Flow matching Our world model is based on the paradigm of diffusion models 16,17 , where the
network 𝑓𝜃 is trained to restore the a data point 𝑥1 given a corrupted version 𝑥𝜏 . The signal level
𝜏 ∈ [0, 1] determines the mixture of noise and data and is randomized during training, where
𝜏 = 0 corresponds to pure noise and 𝜏 = 1 means clean data. We build on the flow matching
formulation 18,19 because of its simplicity, where the network predicts the velocity vector 𝑣 = 𝑥1 − 𝑥0
that points towards the clean data:
                    𝑥𝜏 = (1 − 𝜏) 𝑥0 + 𝜏 𝑥1               𝑥0 ∼ N(0, 𝕀)           𝑥1 ∼ D            𝜏 ∼ 𝑝 ( 𝜏)
                                                                                                                  (1)
                                            L ( 𝜃) = ∥ 𝑓𝜃 ( 𝑥𝜏 , 𝜏) − ( 𝑥1 − 𝑥0 ) ∥ 2

The signal level is typically sampled from a uniform distribution or a logit-normal distribution 20 . At
inference time, the sampling process starts with a pure noise vector 𝑥0 and iteratively transforms it
into a clean data point 𝑥1 over 𝐾 sampling steps with step size 𝑑 = 1/ 𝐾 :

                                     𝑥𝜏+𝑑 = 𝑥𝜏 + 𝑓𝜃 ( 𝑥𝜏 , 𝜏) 𝑑            𝑥0 ∼ N(0, 𝕀)                           (2)

Shortcut models Shortcut models 21 condition the neural network not only on the signal level 𝜏
but also on the requested step size 𝑑 . This allows them to choose the step size at inference time and
generate data points using only a few sampling steps and forward passes of the neural network. For
the finest step size 𝑑min , shortcut models are trained using the flow matching loss. For larger step
sizes 𝑑min < 𝑑 ≤ 1, shortcut models are trained using a bootstrap loss that distills two smaller steps,
where sg(·) stops the gradient:
                                   𝑥0 ∼ N(0, I)            𝑥1 ∼ D          𝜏, 𝑑 ∼ 𝑝 ( 𝜏, 𝑑 )

                  𝑏′ = 𝑓𝜃 ( 𝑥𝜏 , 𝜏, 𝑑 /2)         𝑏′′ = 𝑓𝜃 ( 𝑥 ′ , 𝜏 + 𝑑 /2, 𝑑 /2)       𝑥 ′ = 𝑥𝜏 + 𝑏′ 𝑑 /2
                                                                           (                                      (3)
                                                                               𝑥1 − 𝑥0              if 𝑑 = 𝑑min
               L ( 𝜃) = ∥ 𝑓𝜃 ( 𝑥𝜏 , 𝜏, 𝑑 ) − 𝑣target ∥ 2       𝑣target =
                                                                               sg( 𝑏′ + 𝑏′′ )/2     else

The step size is sampled uniformly as a power of two, based on the maximum number of sampling
steps 𝐾max , which defines the finest step size 𝑑min = 1/ 𝐾max . The signal level is sampled uniformly
over the grid that is reached by the current step size:

                   𝑑 ∼ 1/U({1, 2, 4, 8, . . . , 𝐾max })              𝜏 ∼ U({0, 1/𝑑, . . . , 1 − 1/𝑑 })            (4)

At inference time, one can condition the model on a step size 𝑑 = 1/ 𝐾 to target 𝐾 sampling steps,
without suffering from discretization error because the model has learned to predict the end point
of each step. In practice, shortcut models generate high-quality samples with 2 or 4 sampling steps,
compared to 64 or more steps for typical diffusion models.
Diffusion forcing For sequential data, diffusion forcing 14 assigns a different signal level to each
time step of the data sequence, producing a corrupted sequence. This allows applying loss terms to
all time steps in the sequence, where each time step serves both as denoising task and as history
context for later time steps. At inference time, diffusion forcing supports flexible noise patterns,
such as generating the next frame given clean or lightly noised history.



                                                                                                                   3
                                                                  ẑ                 ẑ               ẑ


                                                                      Block Causal Dynamics

                                                                           Causal Time Layer
             Block Causal Decoder
                                                                             Space Layer
        z              z              z                                                                       L
                                                                                                             ×—
                                                                             Space Layer                      4
             Block Causal Encoder
                                                                             Space Layer




                                                          a     td    z͂      a   td    z͂     a   td   z͂
             (a) Causal Tokenizer                                     (b) Interactive Dynamics

Figure 2: World model design. Dreamer 4 consists of a causal tokenizer and an interactive dynam-
ics model, which both use the same block-causal transformer architecture. The tokenizer encodes
partially masked image patches and latent tokens, squeezes the latents through a low-dimensional
projection with tanh activation, and decodes the patches. It uses causal attention to achieve tempo-
ral compression while allowing frames to be decoded one by one. The dynamics model operates on
the interleaved sequence of actions, shortcut noise levels and step sizes, and tokenizer representa-
tions. It denoises representations via a shortcut forcing objective. After pretraining, the world model
is finetuned into an agent by inserting task tokens into the dynamics transformer and predicting ac-
tions, rewards, and values from them.


3. World Model Agent

We present Dreamer 4, a scalable agent that learns to     Algorithm 1 Dreamer 4
solve complex control tasks by reinforcement learn-
ing inside of a fast and accurate world model. The            Phase 1: World Model Pretraining
agent consists of a tokenizer and a dynamics model,           • Train tokenizer on videos using (5).
as shown in Figure 2. The tokenizer compresses video          • Train world model on tokenized videos
frames into continuous representations and the dy-              and optionally actions using (7).
namics model predicts the representations given in-
terleaved actions, both using the same efficient trans-       Phase 2: Agent Finetuning
former architecture. The tokenizer is trained using           • Finetune world model with task inputs
masked autoencoding and the dynamics is trained us-             for policy and reward heads using (7)
ing a shortcut forcing objective to enable interactive          and (9).
generations with a small number of forward passes
                                                              Phase 3: Imagination Training
and prevent accumulating errors over time. As out-
lined in Algorithm 1, we first pretrain the tokenizer         • Optimize policy head using (11) and
and world model on videos and actions, then finetune            value head using (10) on trajectories
the policy and reward model into the world model by             generated by the world model and the
interleaving task embeddings, and finally post-train            policy head.
the policy through imagination training. To train a
single dynamics transformer with multiple modalities
and output heads, we normalize all loss terms by run-
ning estimates of their root-mean-square (RMS).


                                                                                                             4
3.1. Causal Tokenizer

The tokenizer compresses raw video into a sequence of continuous representations for the dynamics
model to consume and generate. It consists of an encoder and a decoder with a bottleneck in
between. Both components are causal in time, enabling temporal compression while maintaining
the ability to decode frame by frame for interactive inference.
Architecture We use the efficient transformer architecture described later. Each time step consists
of patch tokens of the current image and learned latent tokens. After applying the encoder, the
representations are read out of the latent tokens using a linear projection to a smaller channel
dimension followed by a tanh activation. For the decoder, this representation is projected back up
to the model dimension and concatenated with learned tokens to read out the patches. To flexibly
integrate multiple input modalities if available, the encoder allows the latent tokens to attend to all
modalities, while each modality only attends within itself. Correspondingly, each decoder modality
attends within itself and to the latents, while the latents only attend within themselves.
Masked autoencoding We train the tokenizer using a straightforward reconstruction objective,
consisting of mean squared error and LPIPS 22 loss. To simplify weighing the two loss terms, we
employ loss normalization as explained later.

                                   L ( 𝜃) = LMSE ( 𝜃) + 0.2 LLPIPS ( 𝜃)                            (5)

We drop out input patches to the encoder to improve its representations using masked autoencod-
ing 23,24 . The dropout probability is randomized across images as 𝑝 ∼ 𝑈 (0, 0.9). Patches of each
image are replaced with a learned embedding with this probability, so that the tokenizer is some-
times trained on the 𝑝 = 0 case used during inference. We found MAE training to improve the spatial
consistency of videos generated by the dynamics model.


3.2. Interactive Dynamics

The dynamics model operates on the interleaved sequence of actions and representations produced
by the frozen tokenizer. It is trained using a shortcut forcing objective to enable fast interactive
inference with 𝐾 = 4 forward passes per generated frame.
Architecture The dynamics model uses our efficient transformer architecture on interleaved blocks
of observations and actions. The representations are linearly projected into 𝑆z spatial tokens and
concatenated with 𝑆r learned register tokens 25 and a single token for the shortcut signal level and
step size. Since the signal level and step size are discrete, we encode each with a discrete embedding
lookup and concatenate their channels. Actions can contain multiple components, such as mouse
and keyboard. We encode each action component separately into 𝑆a tokens and sum the results
together with a learned embedding. Continuous actions components are linearly projected and cat-
egorical or binary components use an embedding lookup. When training unlabeled videos, only the
learned embedding is used.
Shortcut forcing For efficient training and inference, we train the dynamics model using a short-
cut forcing objective, which builds on diffusion forcing 14 and shortcut models 21 , reviewed in Sec-
tion 2. We formulate the objective in data space to prevent accumulating errors caused by high-
frequency network outputs and introduce a simple loss weight to focus the model capacity on the
loss terms with the most learning signal. The dynamics model takes the interleaved sequence of


                                                                                                     5
actions 𝑎 = { 𝑎𝑡 }, discrete signal levels 𝜏 = {𝜏𝑡 } and step sizes 𝑑 = { 𝑑𝑡 }, and corrupted representa-
tions ˜𝑧 = { 𝑧𝑡( 𝜏𝑡 ) } as input and predicts the clean representations 𝑧1 = { 𝑧𝑡1 }. Note that 𝑡 ∈ [1, 𝑇 ] is the
sequence timestep while 𝜏𝑡 ∈ [0, 1] is the signal level at that step.
                          𝑧0 ∼ N(0, 1)           𝑧1 ∼ D           𝜏, 𝑑 ∼ 𝑝 ( 𝜏, 𝑑 )        𝜏, 𝑑 ∈ [0, 1] 𝑇
                                                                                                                           (6)
                                      ˆ𝑧1 = 𝑓𝜃 (˜𝑧, 𝜏, 𝑑, 𝑎)        ˜𝑧 = (1 − 𝜏) 𝑧0 + 𝜏 𝑧1

Shortcut models parameterize the network to predict velocities 𝑣 = 𝑥1 − 𝑥0 , called v-prediction 26 .
This approach excels when generating the output jointly as one block, such as for image or video
generation models. However, v-prediction trains the network to produce high-frequency outputs.
When iteratively generating long videos frame by frame, this can cause subtle errors that accumulate
over time. Instead, we found that parameterizing the network to predict clean representations,
called x-prediction, enables high-quality rollouts of arbitrary length. Computing the flow loss term
in x-space is straightforward 26 . To compute the bootstrap loss term, we convert the network output
into v-space and scale the resulting loss back into x-space∗ :
                                  𝑏′ = ( 𝑓𝜃 (˜
                                             𝑧 , 𝜏, 2𝑑 , 𝑎) − 𝑧𝜏 )/(1 − 𝜏)                 𝑧 + 𝑏′ 2𝑑
                                                                                      𝑧′ = ˜
                                 𝑏′′ = ( 𝑓𝜃 ( 𝑧 ′ , 𝜏 + 2𝑑 , 2𝑑 , 𝑎) − 𝑧 ′ )/(1 − ( 𝜏 + 2𝑑 ))
                                (                                                                                          (7)
                               ∥ˆ𝑧1 − 𝑧1 ∥ 22                                                    if 𝑑 = 𝑑min
                      L ( 𝜃) =
                               (1 − 𝜏) 2 ∥ (ˆ𝑧1 − ˜𝑧)/(1 − 𝜏) − sg( 𝑏1 + 𝑏2 )/2∥ 22              else

Low signal levels contain less learning signal, because the flow matching term degenerates to pre-
dicting the dataset mean, while the bootstrap term is generally easier to optimize because it has
deterministic targets compared to the noisy flow matching term. To focus the model capacity on
signal levels with the most learning signal, we propose a ramp loss weight that linearly increases
with the signal level 𝜏, where 𝜏 = 0 corresponds to full noise and 𝜏 = 1 to clean data:

                                                      𝑤 ( 𝜏) = 0.9𝜏 + 0.1                                                  (8)

At inference time, the dynamics model supports different noise patterns. We sample autoregressively
in time and generate the representations of each frame using the shortcut model with 𝐾 = 4 sample
steps with corresponding step size 𝑑 = 1/4. We slightly corrupt the past inputs to the dynamics
model to signal level 𝜏ctx = 0.1 to make the model robust to small imperfections in its generations.


3.3. Imagination Training

To solve control tasks, we first adapt the pretrained world model to predict actions and rewards from
the dataset conditioned on one of multiple tasks. For this, we insert agent tokens as an additional
modality into the world model transformer and interleave it with the image representations, actions,
and register tokens. The agent tokens receive task embeddings as input and we use them to predict
the policy and reward model using MLP heads. While the agent tokens attend to themselves and
all other modalities, no other modalities can attend back to the agent tokens. This is crucial for
avoiding causal confusion of the world model—its future predictions can only be directly influenced

∗ The network output is converted as 𝑣
                                     ˆ          𝑥1 − 𝑥𝜏 )/(1 − 𝜏). The MSE in x-space and v-space is related by ∥ˆ𝑥1 − 𝑥1 ∥ 22 =
                                           𝜏 = (ˆ
 (1 − 𝜏) 2 ∥ˆ        2                       2
            𝜏 − 𝑣𝜏 ∥ 2 , motivating a (1 − 𝜏) multiplier to bring the bootstrap loss into a range similar to the x-space flow
            𝑣
loss.

                                                                                                                              6
by actions, not by the current task. To improve beyond strategies displayed in the dataset, we then
finetune the policy through imagination training by reinforcement learning on rollouts generated
by the world model, using an additional value head.
Behavior cloning and reward model After pretraining the world model on action-conditioned
video prediction, the second training phase involves learning a task-conditioned policy and reward
model. Given a dataset of videos 𝑥 = { 𝑥𝑡 } that are encoded into representations 𝑧 = { 𝑧𝑡 }, actions
𝑎 = { 𝑎𝑡 }, tasks 𝑞 = {𝑞𝑡 }, and scalar rewards 𝑟 = {𝑟𝑡 }, we train the policy and reward heads on the
task output embeddings ℎ𝑡 using multi-token prediction (MTP) 27 of length 𝐿 = 8:
                                                  𝐿
                                                 ∑︁                               𝐿
                                                                                 ∑︁
                                    L ( 𝜃) = −           ln 𝑝𝜃 ( 𝑎𝑡+𝑛 | ℎ𝑡 ) −         ln 𝑝𝜃 ( 𝑟𝑡+𝑛 | ℎ𝑡 )                   (9)
                                                 𝑛=0                             𝑛=0

To preserve existing capabilities, we reuse the pretraining setting with this additional loss function,
so the representations are noisy and we continue to apply the video prediction loss. We parameterize
the policy and reward heads using small MLPs with one output layer per MTP distance. Following
Dreamer 3, the reward head is parameterized as a symexp twohot output 1 to robustly learn stochas-
tic rewards across varying orders of magnitude. The policy head is parameterized as categorical or
vectorized binary distribution, depending on the action space of the dataset.
Reinforcement learning To improve the policy beyond behaviors displayed in the dataset, we
continue training it with reinforcement learning on imagined rollouts to maximize the learned re-
ward model. Unlike online reinforcement learning that requires interaction with the environment,
our policy learns purely inside the world model, enabling it to improve offline. We initialize a value
head and a frozen copy of the policy head that serves as a behavioral prior. We only update the pol-
icy and value heads and keep the transformer frozen.† Imagined rollouts start from contexts of the
dataset that was used during the earlier training phases. Unlike previous generations of Dreamer, we
start only one rollout from each context, prioritizing data diversity and reducing memory consump-
tion. The rollouts are generated by unrolling the transformer with itself, sampling representations
𝑧 = { 𝑧𝑡 } from the flow head and actions 𝑎 = { 𝑎𝑡 } from the policy head. We annotate the resulting
trajectories with rewards 𝑟 = {𝑟𝑡 } using the reward head and values 𝑣 = { 𝑣𝑡 } using the value head.
The value head is trained to predict the discounted sum of future rewards, allowing the policy to
maximize rewards beyond the imagination horizon. It uses a symexp twohot output to robustly
learn across different scales of values 1 . We train the value head using temporal difference learning
(TD-learning) 28 to predict 𝜆 -returns computed from the predicted rewards and values along the
sequence, where 𝛾 = 0.997 is a discount factor and 𝑐𝑡 indicates non-terminal states:
                              𝑇
                             ∑︁                                                                              
                L ( 𝜃) = −          ln 𝑝𝜃 ( 𝑅𝑡𝜆 | 𝑠𝑡 )        𝑅𝑡𝜆 = 𝑟𝑡 + 𝛾𝑐𝑡 (1 − 𝜆 ) 𝑣𝑡 + 𝜆𝑅𝑡𝜆+1                𝑅𝑇𝜆 = 𝑣𝑇   (10)
                             𝑡 =1

Unlike previous generations of Dreamer, the policy head learns using PMPO 29 , a robust reinforce-
ment learning objective that uses the sign of the advantages 𝐴𝑡 = 𝑅𝑡𝜆 − 𝑣𝑡 and ignores their magnitude.
This property alleviates the need for normalizing returns or advantages and ensures equal focus on
all tasks despite potentially differing return scales. PMPO balances the focus on positive and negative
feedback by separately averaging a simple maximum likelihood loss over the states with positive and
negative advantages, respectively. We assign all imagined states 𝑠𝑖 across batch and time dimensions

† Finetuning the full transformer provides small additional benefits at higher computational cost. For that, the dynamics,

policy prior, and reward losses need to be applied during imagination training to preserve their functions.

                                                                                                                              7
to the positive set D + = { 𝑠𝑖 | 𝐴𝑡 ≥ 0} or the negative set D − = { 𝑠𝑖 | 𝐴𝑡 < 0} and apply the following
policy loss:
                                                                                             𝑁
                1 − 𝛼 ∑︁                              𝛼 ∑︁                                𝛽 ∑︁
     L ( 𝜃) =                  ln 𝜋𝜃 ( 𝑎 𝑖 | 𝑠 𝑖 ) −                ln 𝜋𝜃 ( 𝑎 𝑖 | 𝑠 𝑖 ) +       KL[ 𝜋𝜃 ( 𝑎𝑖 | 𝑠𝑖 ) ∥ 𝜋prior ]
                |D − | 𝑖 ∈ D −                       |D + | 𝑖 ∈ D +                       𝑁
                                                                                            𝑖=1
                                                                                                                                (11)


We set 𝛼 = 0.5 to balance the positive and negative sets equally and use a weaker scale of 𝛽 = 0.3
for the behavioral prior. Unlike the original PMPO objective, we use a reverse direction for the prior
KL to better constrain the policy to the space of reasonable behaviors. We find the scaling between
the three objective terms to be highly robust in practice as they are all measured in nats 30 .


3.4. Efficient Transformer

Scaling up world models to diverse data distributions while maintaining fast inference requires an ef-
ficient high capacity architecture. In this section, we introduce our efficient transformer architecture
that is used for both the tokenizer and the dynamics model. The architecture is a 2D transformer 31
with time and space dimensions. To support interactive generation, the attention is masked to be
causal in time, so that all tokens within a time step can attend to each other and to the past. We
start from a standard transformer with pre-layer RMSNorm 32 , RoPE 33 , and SwiGLU 34 . We employ
QKNorm 35 and attention logit soft capping 36,37 to increase training stability.
Efficiency Inference speed of block-causal transformer architectures is limited both by the FLOPs
of the MLPs and the memory bandwidth needed to access the KV cache of a long context to attend
into. We employ a sequence of improvements to speed up inference, some of which also accelerate
training. First, we break up the cost of dense attention over all video tokens by using separate
space-only and time-only attention layers 38 . Second, we find that only a relatively small number of
temporal layers are needed and only use temporal attention once every 4 layers, in line with recent
findings 39 . Third, we apply GQA 40 to all attention layers in the dynamics, where multiple query
heads attend to the same key-value heads to reduce the KV cache size further.
Sequence length Increasing spatial tokens directly improves visual quality, whereas increasing
temporal tokens allows training longer context lengths for more temporally consistent generation. To
support efficient training, we alternate training on many short batches and occasional long batches,
and finetune the model on only long batches afterwards. Alternating batch lengths produces inter-
mediate training metrics and generations that are more indicative of final model performance than
training only on short batches. The batch lengths need to be longer than the context length of the
model to prevent the transformer from overfitting to always seeing a start frame at the beginning of
its context, enabling length generalization to arbitrary generation lengths.




                                                                                                                                  8
                                                Offline Diamond Challenge
Success rate (%)

                    99


                           99




                                           99
                                   99
                    98


                          98




                                          98
                    97




                                   97




                                                  97


                                                            96
                          96




                                          95


                                                 94
                                  93




                                                          92


                                                                      90
                                                86
                   84




                                                         84


                                                                     77


                                                                                 67
                         65




                                                                                          58
                                                                 54
                                        53




                                                                            46




                                                                                                             29
                                                                            26


                                                                                        42


                                                                                                 23
                                                                                                 40
                                                                                      16




                                                                                                        11
                                                       6.9
                                4.7




                                                                                                4.3




                                                                                                                  0.7
                                                                                                      0.6
                                                                           0.1




                                                                                               0.1
                                                0




                                                                 0




                                                                                      0




                                                                                                      0


                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                  0
                              VPT (finetuned)       BC           VLA (Gemma 3)                   Dreamer 4
      Figure 3: Agent performance in Minecraft without environment interaction. All methods have ac-
      cess to the same contractor dataset 15 with image inputs and low-level mouse and keyboard actions.
      We report the success rates of important items obtained during 60-minute episodes that start in
      random worlds and from empty inventory, computed over 1000 episodes. Leveraging imagination
      training, Dreamer 4 is the first agent to obtain diamonds in Minecraft purely from offline experience.
      Dreamer 4 substantially outperforms OpenAI’s VPT offline agent 15 while using 100× less data. It
      also outperforms our VLA agent 41,42 , which leverages the general knowledge of the Gemma 3 vision-
      language model 43 , nearly tripling its success rate for crafting iron pickaxes.


      4. Experiments

      We perform a wide range of experiments to evaluate and explore the capabilities of Dreamer 4.
      The majority of our experiments focus on Minecraft, a complex video game that features infinite
      open worlds including monsters and hundreds of items that can be mined or crafted, with raw pixel
      observations and low-level mouse and keyboard actions. We primarily use the VPT dataset 15 that
      contains 2541 hours of contractor gameplay with 360p video and mouse and keyboard actions at
      20 FPS. The experiments are designed to answer the following questions:

     • Does Dreamer 4 learn to solve challenging control tasks purely by imagination training inside the
       world model, without online environment interaction? (Section 4.1)
     • How well does Dreamer 4 learn to predict accurate object interactions and game mechanics in
       Minecraft compared to previous world models? (Section 4.2)
     • How much action data does Dreamer 4 need for learning action conditioning, and how far does
       the learned action grounding generalize? (Section 4.3)
     • To what extent does each component of its objective and architecture contribute to the perfor-
       mance of Dreamer 4? (Section 4.4)

      We train models with 2B parameters—400M for the tokenizer and 1.6B for the dynamics model—on
      256 to 1024 TPU-v5p with batch size 1 per device and FSDP sharding 44,45 . To improve generations
      without context, we treat 30% of the videos in the batch as separate images, effectively training the
      dynamics model to generate start frames. For Minecraft, we use 256 spatial tokens with 192 frames
      context length and 256 batch length. For the real world datasets, we use 512 spatial tokens with 96
      frames context length and 128 batch length.




                                                                                                                    9
                                                                                                           31
                                                                                              31
                    99
                    99
                    97
Success rate (%)
                   93




                                                                                                          29
                                                                                             29
                                90
                                89




                                                              Time (min)
                               77




                                                                                   24
               64




                                            40




                                                                                                  17
                                                                       17




                                                                                                               17
                          54




                                                                                     16
                                                                                    15
                                                      29
                                         28




                                                                                                                13
                                                                                                    12
                                        23




                                                     17




                                                                             4.6
                                                                             4.4
                                                                             9.5




                                                                                           8.9
                         8.8




                                                   11
                                                 0.62




                                                                           7.2
                                      4.3




                                                                                         6.7
                                     0.2




                                                                                        N/A



                                                                                                         N/A
                                                 0
                     BC (notask)            BC        VLA (Gemma 3)            WM+BC             Dreamer 4
     Figure 4: Agent ablations on the offline diamond challenge. We report success rates and time
     needed to reach an item for four milestone items. Dreamer 4 outperforms methods based on behav-
     ioral cloning in both metrics, demonstrating that imagination training improves both the robustness
     and efficiency of the policy. Moreover, using the world model representations for behavioral cloning
     outperforms using Gemma 3 or training from scratch.


     4.1. Offline Diamond Challenge

     We evaluate Dreamer 4 on the Minecraft diamond challenge, a long-horizon control task that re-
     quires solving several sub tasks, such as gathering materials and crafting tools in a complex proce-
     durally generated 3D world from raw pixels and mouse and keyboard actions. Human players with
     Minecraft experience take 20 minutes to collect a diamond on average, corresponding to sequences
     of 24,000 mouse and keyboard actions.
     Offline setting While previous agents have achieved diamonds in Minecraft through online inter-
     action with the environment 1,15 , deploying partially-trained policies is often infeasible for practical
     applications, such as physical robots, because ensuring safety, resetting the scene, and providing
     rewards in real time is difficult. Instead, we focus on the challenge of learning purely offline from
     a fixed experience dataset. We only use the VPT contractor dataset 15 —which contains 2.5K hours
     of videos, actions, and event annotations—without allowing the agent to interact with the environ-
     ment for learning, and compare to baselines in this offline setting. We follow the VPT evaluation
     protocol of raw pixel inputs and low-level mouse and keyboard actions, requiring crafting through
     the in-game user interface. Episodes last 60 minutes, starting from an empty inventory in randomly
     generated Minecraft worlds.
     Implementation Dreamer 4 learns a single transformer that predicts inputs, actions, rewards,
     and values. To build a steerable agent, we opt for a multi-task setting and condition the actions, re-
     wards, and values on task embeddings. We annotate the tasks and their sparse binary rewards using
     the existing events in the VPT dataset. Table 4 lists the 20 tasks and Table 6 shows the linear prompt
     sequence that guides the agent to reach diamonds during evaluation in the environment. To amplify
     the signal in the dataset during behavior cloning, reward modeling, and reinforcement learning, we
     use data mixture of 50% uniform sequences and 50% relevant sequences that accomplish one of
     the tasks. The behavioral cloning loss is applied only on the relevant fraction, while the dynamics
     loss is applied only on the uniform sequences to avoid optimistic generations. We use one-hot task
     indicators but text embeddings could easily be used. We represent keyboard actions as 23 binary
     distributions and mouse actions as a categorical with 121 classes using foveated discretization 15 .




                                                                                                                10
                               Task for human player: build 3x3 wall from planks
          Start image   Interactive generation
Dreamer
Oasis
Lucid




  Figure 5: Human interaction. A human player counterfactually interacts with the world model in
  real time via mouse and keyboard to perform the same task from the same initial image. Dreamer 4 is
  the first world model to accurately predict the object interactions and game mechanics of placing the
  blocks in the correct shape. In contrast, previous Minecraft world models degrade visually, change
  the held item, and hallucinate structures that the player never built. The Dreamer 4 world model
  allows the player to accomplish the task ( ) while Oasis and Lucid do not ( ).


  We compare the following agents:

 • VPT (finetuned) The strongest Minecraft agent for mouse and keyboard control in the liter-
   ature 15 . The VPT paper presents two unconditioned behavioral cloning policies in the offline
   setting, both trained on 270K hours of synthetically annotated YouTube gameplay videos, and
   one further finetuned on a filtered subset of “early game” data. We use the finetuned policy
   because it significantly outperforms the pretraining policy.
 • BC (notask) Behavioral cloning from scratch using multi-token prediction (MTP), without task
   conditioning. While VPT uses the contractor data to train an action labeler and trains the policy
   on annotated YouTube videos, our BC agent trains directly and only on the relevant subset of the
   contractor actions. This agent is not task conditioned, making it directly comparable to VPT.
 • BC Behavioral cloning from scratch on the filtered contractor dataset with task conditioning.
   This agent is trained on the same filtered contractor dataset as BC (notask) but the additional
   task input makes it steerable. When evaluating in the environment, the prompt sequence guides
   the agent through intermediate tasks towards mining diamonds.
 • VLA (Gemma 3) Following the VLA recipe 41,42 , we train a behavioral cloning policy by fine-
   tuning the vision-language model Gemma 3 43 on the relevant sequences using MTP. Gemma 3
   has been pretrained using substantially more compute and data than our other models, including
   native pretraining on images for visual perception, making it a strong baseline.
 • WM+BC The behavioral cloning policy of Dreamer 4, before applying imagination training.
   This policy is initialized from the world model pretrained on the full contractor dataset. It then
   undergoes agent finetuning using behavioral cloning, reward modeling, and dynamics losses.
 • Imagination RL The full Dreamer 4 agent produced by finetuning the WM+BC agent through
   reinforcement learning in imagination, which we refer to as imagination training. Despite per-
   forming on-policy reinforcement learning inside of the world model, there is no actual environ-
   ment interaction, making it an offline method.

                                                                                                    11
     Model                Parameters Resolution          Context         FPS         Success
     MineWorld               1.2B         384×224          0.8s            2            —
     Lucid-v1                1.1B         640×360          1.0s           44           0/16
     Oasis (small)           500M         640×360          1.6s           20           0/16
     Oasis (large)            —           360×360          1.6s           ∼5           5/16
     Dreamer 4                 2B         640×360          9.6s           21          14/16

Table 1: Comparison of Minecraft world models. Dreamer 4 is the first world model to accurately
simulate a wide range of object interactions and game mechanics in Minecraft. Moreover, Dreamer 4
pushes the limits of context length compared to previous models by 6×, while maintaining real-time
interactive inference. We measure the inference speed of each model on a single H100 GPU, and
translate the inference speed for the proprietary large Oasis model based on public information. The
Minecraft dataset is recorded at 20 FPS, matching the update rate of the game.


Agent performance Figure 3 compares the agent performance on the diamond task. We re-
port the success rates for several relevant items leading up to diamonds that are listed in Table 5.
VPT (finetuned) progresses up to sticks, which it achieves 53% of the time. It also collects a small
amount of stone, iron ore, and iron ingots through edge cases, such as exploding Creeper mobs and
loot chests. Using the contractor actions directly instead of annotating YouTube videos, our modern
BC baseline achieves higher performance than VPT (finetuned). VLA (Gemma 3) shows that ini-
tializing the policy from a pretrained models offers significant benefits, progressing up to the iron
pickaxe with a success rate of 11%. Dreamer 4 achieves high success rates of over 90% up to the
stone pickaxe, a success rate of 29% for the iron pickaxe, and obtains diamonds in 0.7% of episodes.
Imagination training shows stronger improvements over the behavior cloning agents the more chal-
lenging the milestone is. Figure 4 compares additional agents on the diamond task, showing that
the world model representations outperform the general representations of Gemma 3 for behavioral
cloning. This indicates that video prediction implicitly learns an understanding of the world that
is also useful for decision making. Finally, imagination training consistently improves not only the
success rates but also makes the policy more efficient so that it reaches the milestones faster.


4.2. Human Interaction

To evaluate its ability to predict complex interactions, we train Dreamer 4 on the Minecraft VPT
dataset 15 and compare its generations to previous world models on this dataset. For this evaluation,
a human player tries to accomplish tasks by playing inside of the world model, as shown in Figure 5.
The human player receives the task description and the world model is initialized to a start frame
for the task. We select a diverse set of tasks that cover a broad range of object interactions and
game mechanics. The tasks include digging a pit, building a wall, chopping a tree, placing and
riding a boat, looking away and back at objects, interacting with crafting benches and furnaces,
and more. We compare Dreamer 4 to the world models Oasis 46 , Lucid-v1 47 , and MineWorld 48 .
Note that we cannot directly compare to Genie 3 7 , because it only supports camera actions and one
generic “interact” button, whereas Minecraft requires a more general mouse and keyboard action
space. Table 1 summarizes the compared models. Full results are given in Figures 12 to 14.




                                                                                                  12
Figure 6: Robotics generations for counterfactual actions. Dreamer 4 learns an accurate real-time
simulator of the environment, allowing human operators to control the imagined robot to pick up
objects, flip over a bowl, press a ball onto a plate, move a towel, and throw a bowl.


Inference speed We measure the inference speed of each model on a single H100 GPU. Dreamer 4
and Lucid-v1 achieve real-time interactive inference by exceeding the 20 FPS of the Minecraft physics
engine‡ and the VPT dataset 15 . Dreamer 4 has a substantially longer context of 9.6 seconds com-
pared to the 0.8–1.6 seconds of prior models. Oasis comes in two sizes, a 500M parameter version
with open weights and a larger model of unknown size that is playable on the project website.
The small model achieves 20 FPS on one H100. The large model is hosted on multiple H100s for
interaction online and we estimate its inference speed on a single H100 around 5 FPS based on
public information. MineWorld achieves 2 FPS with their parallel decoding approach and is even
slower without. Additionally, parallel decoding requires knowing actions in advance, which is also
required in the provided user interface. Thus, it does not support real-time interactions and we
cannot evaluate it on our tasks, which require many hundreds of actions.
Complex interactions Video generations of human players attempting all tasks inside of the
world models are shown in Figures 12 to 14. Lucid-v1 does not allow completing the tasks, with
generations diverging or object interactions being ignored. The large Oasis model allows performing
5 out of 16, such as placing torches, filling a window with glass panes, and opening a door. However,
it fails at building tasks because after placing a few blocks, it quickly hallucinates large structures
into the world. This “autocompletion” failure mode reflects a lack of understanding of the game
mechanics. We did not evaluate MineWorld because of its lack of interactive inference. Dreamer 4
achieves 14 out of 16 tasks, accurately generating complex interactions and game mechanics such as
switching items, placing and breaking blocks, fighting monsters, placing and riding boats, entering
portals, and more. Its temporal consistency is limited to a context of 9.6 seconds, albeit substantially
longer than previous models. While it correctly generates the interfaces for inventory, crafting, and
furnaces and predicts most mouse movement, inventory items are sometimes unclear or change over
time, leaving room for future improvements.
As a step towards testing the applicability of Dreamer 4 to real world video, we also train the world
model on a robotics dataset 49 . In Figure 6, we observe accurate physics and counterfactual interac-
tions with real world objects, overcoming the causal confusion of existing video models. Additional
details are included in the supplementary material.

‡ https://minecraft.fandom.com/wiki/Tick


                                                                                                     13
                  Action following performance                                   Action extrapolation to Nether
           100                     100                                     100                     100
            75                      75                                      75                      75
PSNR (%)




                                                                PSNR (%)
                               SSIM (%)




                                                                                              SSIM (%)
            50                      50                                      50                      50
            25                      25                                      25                      25
             0                       0                                       0                        0
                0
              10
            10 0
            25 0
              00


                                              0
                                            10
                                          10 0
                                          25 0
                                            00




                                                                            acNeth s
                                                                           All ionser
                                                                                     ns




                                                                                                          acNeth s
                                                                                                         All ionser
                                                                                                                   ns
                                                                           No ction




                                                                                                         No ction
             10
              0




                                           10
                                            0




                                                                                 tio




                                                                                                               tio
             Action data (hours)          Action data (hours)




                                                                              ac




                                                                                                            ac
                                                                               t




                                                                                                             t
                                                                              a




                                                                                                            a
                                                                           No




                                                                                                         No
   Figure 7: Action generalization. (left) Dreamer 4 learns accurate action conditioning from 2500
   hours of video with only 100 hours of paired actions. It achieves over 80% of the action-conditioned
   generation accuracy, normalized within the range of training without any actions and using all
   actions. (right) When learned with only actions of the Minecraft Overworld, the action conditioning
   generalizes to the Nether and End dimensions of the game that are only seen in unlabeled videos.
   These environments are distinct from the Overworld in their textures, blocks, and items. The results
   indicate that Dreamer 4 learns action conditioning from small amounts of action data that generalize
   broadly, paving the way toward learning simulators from diverse unlabeled web videos.


   4.3. Action Generalization

   One promise of world models is to leverage diverse unlabeled videos to teach agents about the world.
   For example, a world model could learn general physics and object interactions from web videos
   where actions are not available. In this section, we investigate the amount of paired videos with
   actions that are needed for grounding an embodiment into the Dreamer 4 world model. Intuitively,
   the world model has to learn a broader distribution of possible outcomes when actions are missing,
   and can narrow the distribution down when actions are provided. Moreover, we investigate how well
   the action conditioning generalizes, not just within the same distribution, but also out of distribution
   to parts of the world specifically held out. To measure the accuracy of the action conditioning, we
   compare action-conditioned multi-step generations to ground truth videos on the holdout set. We
   report PSNR and SSIM for 16-step generations given 320 frames of context.
   Amount of actions To understand the amount of video with actions needed to learn action con-
   ditioning, we train Dreamer 4 on all 2541 hours of videos in the VPT dataset, but only provide
   actions for a small subset of the videos. When actions are unavailable, the dynamics model is con-
   ditioned on a learned embedding, as described in Section 3.2. We train Dreamer 4 models with 0,
   10, 100, 1000, and 2541 hours of actions. The available actions are the first in sequential order of
   the dataset, corresponding to fewer unique worlds and players than random shuffling would yield.
   Figure 7 show the quality of the action conditioning compared to training with no actions at all to
   training with all actions. With only 10 hours of actions, Dreamer 4 achieves 53% PSNR and 75%
   SSIM compared to a model trained with all actions. With 100 hours of actions, the performance
   increases further to 85% PSNR and 100% SSIM. This result demonstrates that world models absorb
   the majority of their knowledge from unlabeled videos, and require only a small amount of actions.
   Action extrapolation In principle, world models may not only learn action ground from a few
   actions but also generalize their action conditioning to completely new scenarios. In the future, this
   could allow world models to absorb general knowledge from diverse web videos to simulate agents
   in diverse environments. We perform, to the best of our knowledge, the first controlled evaluation

                                                                                                                    14
                                                Train step      Inference       Quality
         Model
                                                 seconds          FPS (↑)        FVD (↓)
         Diffusion Forcing Transformer              9.8             0.8            306
         + Fewer sampling steps ( 𝐾 = 4)            9.8             9.1            875
         + Shortcut model                           9.8             9.1            329
         + X-Prediction                             9.8             9.1            326
         + X-Loss                                   9.8             9.1            151
         + Ramp weight                              9.8             9.1            102
         + Alternating batch lengths                1.5             9.1             80
         + Long context every 4 layers              0.6            18.9             70
         + GQA                                      0.5            23.2             71
         + Time factorized long context             0.4            30.1             91
         + Register tokens                          0.5            28.9             91
         + More spatial tokens ( 𝑁z = 128)          0.8            25.7             66
         + More spatial tokens ( 𝑁z = 256)          1.7            21.4             57

Table 2: Cascade of model design choices. Dreamer 4 is based on a shortcut forcing objective and
an efficient transformer architecture, combining a range of known techniques to achieve accurate
and fast interleaved generation. Starting from a naive diffusion forcing transformer with 𝑁z = 64
spatial tokens and 𝐾 = 64 sampling steps, we apply the objective and architecture modifications,
and increase the number of spatial tokens once feasible. Inference speed measured on a single H100
GPU. The resulting world model achieves high model capacity and inference efficiency.


of this hypothesis. For this, we carefully split the VPT dataset into one portion that only contains
videos of the Overworld and another portion that only contains the other two game dimensions, the
Nether and End. Where the Overworld contains forests, deserts, oceans, and more, the Nether and
End feature substantially different and unique visuals. The Nether is an underworld filled with lava
and red blocks and the End is filled with yellow blocks and black towers unseen in the Overworld.
We train Dreamer 4 on videos of both datasets but only provide actions for the Overworld. We then
perform an action-conditioned evaluation of the resulting model on the Nether and End, for which it
has never seen any actions. In a prior experiment, we observed that training only on the Overworld
portion without any Nether videos results in poor generation scores for Nether start frames. Figure 7
reports the relative performance compared to training without any or with all actions. Surprisingly,
the world model achieves 76% of the PSNR and 80% of the SSIM of the model trained with all
actions. This demonstrates that the action conditioning of world models can generalize to scenarios
known only from unlabeled videos.


4.4. Model Design

World models require high model capacity to predict complex object interactions and fast inference
to support imagination training and human interaction for inspection. Moreover, interactive infer-
ence prompts different design choices compared to typical video models to enable fast generation
of individual frames and prevent accumulating errors. In this section, we ablate the objective and
architecture decisions of Dreamer 4 by applying a cascade of improvements to a naive diffusion forc-
ing transformer baseline. To evaluate each model, we train for 48 hours and then generate 1024
videos of 384 frames (2̃0 seconds) each without any context, with interactive actions chosen by a
fixed behavioral cloning policy. We then split the resulting videos into 16 frame chunks to compute
the Frechét Video Distance (FVD) 50 to the holdout dataset.

                                                                                                  15
Table 2 shows the progression of models and their gen-           Generation quality for sampling steps
eration quality and speed. We start with a standard
block-causal transformer with dense attention and diffu-          1000                Diffusion Forcing
sion forcing with velocity parameterization. We target 20          800                Shortcut Forcing




                                                              FVD ( )
FPS interactive inference on a single H100 GPU, matching           600
the tick rate of Minecraft and the framerate of the VPT
dataset. With 64 sampling steps per frame, the baseline
                                                                   400
falls short of real-time generations with only 0.8 FPS on          200
one H100 GPU, while 4 sampling steps achieve 9.1 FPS but             0
result in poor quality. Shortcut models 21 nearly recover                1 2 4 8 16 32 64
the original visual quality with only 4 sampling steps.                        Sampling steps
We then parameterize the model to make x-space predic-          Figure 8: Generation quality of short-
tions, compute the loss in x-space, and apply the ramp loss     cut forcing compared to diffusion forc-
weight. These changes substantially improve generation          ing. Shortcut forcing with only 4 sam-
quality over traditional v-space prediction, especially for     pling steps approaches the quality of dif-
long generations. We hypothesize that the prediction tar-       fusion forcing with 64 steps, resulting in
gets in x-space are more structured and thus reduce the         16× faster generations.
risk of high-frequency errors that accumulate over time.
Figure 8 compares the visual quality of shortcut forcing to
diffusion forcing—both using the x-space loss with ramp
weight—for a wider range of sampling steps.
Training on alternating batch lengths is similar to progressive training and speeds up learning while
allowing to generate long videos for inspection throughout training. Using temporal attention only
every 4 layers not only speeds up training and inference 39 but also improves generation quality,
possibly because of the inductive bias of spatial attention that focuses computation on the current
frame. GQA further accelerates generations without degrading performance. Switching the long
context layers from dense to time-only attention accelerates inference at a mild quality cost, and
prepares us to increase the overall number of tokens subsequently. While the register tokens do
not improve FVD measurably, we qualitatively notice that they improve temporal consistency. After
these changes, training and inference is fast enough to increase model capacity through more spatial
tokens, improving predictions of complex interactions. The complete model achieves an FVD of 57
compared to 306 for the naive diffusion forcing transformer baseline and 124 for the complete
architecture with v-space prediction and losses.


                                                                                  Data (hours)
        Agent              Inputs             Actions
                                                                        Offline       Web      Online
                           64×64,       keyboard, camera,
        Dreamer 3                                                         —            —       1.4K
                          inventory      abstract crafting
        VPT (RL)          128×128        keyboard, mouse                 2.5K        270K      194K
        VPT (BC)          128×128        keyboard, mouse                 2.5K        270K       —
        Dreamer 4         360×640        keyboard, mouse                 2.5K          —        —

Table 3: Comparison of experimental setups for different Minecraft agents. Dreamer 4 learns purely
from offline experience and requires 100× less data than previous keyboard and mouse agents. See
Figure 10 for examples of input images.


                                                                                                        16
5. Related Work

Minecraft agents Obtaining diamonds in the video game Minecraft has been a focus of intelligent
agent research 51–54 , a long-horizon task that requires gathering resources and crafting tools through
thousands of low-level actions in complex procedurally generated 3D worlds. Different setups have
been used in the literature, with Table 3 summarizing the ones relevant to our work. VPT 15 collects
2.5K hours of contractor gameplay and uses it to annotate 270K hours of web videos with synthetic
mouse and keyboard actions. Behavioral cloning on this large offline dataset and targeted finetuning
on “early-game” data yields a policy that occasionally obtains wooden pickaxes. Following up with
194K hours of online reinforcement learning results in a policy that obtains diamonds and diamond
pickaxes. Dreamer 3 1 learns to collect diamonds from scratch from 1.4K hours of online interaction,
without any human data. It uses the MineRL competition action space that includes abstract crafting
actions. Other works have explored novel algorithms for easier tasks 55–58 . In this paper, we train
an agent to achieve diamonds purely from the 2.5K hour contractor dataset, without any online
interaction. We use low-level mouse and keyboard actions and high-resolution image inputs.
World model agents Learning behaviors based on learned models of the environment has been
explored for a long time 59–61 . Visual Foresight 62 , the work by Ha and Schmidhuber 63 , and PlaNet 64
achieved world models accurate enough for planning from pixels. With Dreamer, world models have
become the state-of-the-art approach for solving control problems with high-dimensional inputs, out-
performing model-free reinforcement learning in robustness, efficiency, and final performance 1,65,66 .
World models based on transformers or diffusion objectives have demonstrated high data efficiency
for discrete control 67–69 . However, these world models have been limited in model capacity, restrict-
ing their applicability to relatively simple simulated environments.
Scalable world models Larger world models have been shown to simulate more complex data
distributions 70 . World models like Genie 3 generate highly diverse scenes and simulate camera
movement and simple interactions 7,9,10,12 . PlayerOne 8 and PEVA 11 condition on more detailed hu-
man movement. Oasis 46 , Lucid 47 , and MineWorld 48 learn Minecraft simulators from mouse and
keyboard inputs. Whereas Oasis captures simple game mechanics and achieves real-time inference
on specialized hardware, Lucid’s predictions diverge quickly and MineWorld is slower than real time.
GameNGen 71 finetunes Stable Diffusion into a playable simulator of a level of the game Doom. DIA-
MOND 4 learns a simulator of a level of the game CS GO, achieving short-term predictions. GAIA 72,73
generates driving scenarios from real world data. However, these world models still struggle to pre-
dict complex object interactions precisely enough for imagination training.
Fast generation Enabling fast and accurate generations has been a long-standing challenge in
generating modeling. MaskGit generates discrete tokens in parallel to accelerate sampling over au-
toregressive models 74 . Diffusion models are often distilled to enable sampling using fewer forward
passes 75,76 , which requires two training phases. Consistency models learn straight paths to en-
able fast image generation but require careful schedules 77–79 , with successful applications to video
generation 80 . Shortcut models 21 condition flows on both noise level and step size, producing fast
generative models in one training phase and without schedules. Mean Flow 81 extends the idea of
conditioning on the step size to a continuous time formulation. Efficient and sparse architectures
are used for video generation because of the large number of tokens 38,82,83 . These models do not
support interactive inference and many of the techniques are complimentary to our work.




                                                                                                     17
6. Discussion

We present Dreamer 4, a scalable agent that learns to solve challenging control tasks by imagination
training inside of a fast and accurate world model. Dreamer 4 is the first agent to obtain diamonds
in Minecraft purely from offline data, without online interaction. This achievement demonstrates its
learning successful long-horizon strategies in complex environments. Learning purely from offline
datasets enables applications where online interaction is impractical or unsafe.
The world model of Dreamer 4 rests on a shortcut forcing objective and an efficient transformer
architecture to predict complex object interactions while supporting interactive inference in real
time on a single GPU. We demonstrate that it significantly outperforms previous world models on
Minecraft, where it accurately predicts a wide range of game mechanics from mouse and keyboard
inputs. However, the world model is far from a full clone of the game, especially due to short memory
and imprecise inventory predictions, leaving Minecraft as an ideal benchmark for future world model
and agent research. We also show that Dreamer 4 learns accurate action conditioning from only a
small amount of videos with actions, allowing it to absorb the majority of its knowledge from diverse
unlabeled videos.
Promising future directions include pretraining on general internet videos, integrating long-term
memory into the world model and agent, incorporating language understanding, leveraging small
amounts of corrective online data, and automatically discovering goals to break up long tasks.
Dreamer 4 offers a reliable and performant starting point for these explorations.




                                                                                                  18
References

 [1] Danijar Hafner, Jurgis Pasukonis, Jimmy Ba, and Timothy Lillicrap. Mastering diverse control
     tasks through world models. Nature, pages 1–7, 2025.
 [2] Philipp Wu, Alejandro Escontrela, Danijar Hafner, Pieter Abbeel, and Ken Goldberg.
     Daydreamer: World models for physical robot learning. In Conference on robot learning, pages
     2226–2240. PMLR, 2023.
 [3] Nicklas Hansen, Hao Su, and Xiaolong Wang. Td-mpc2: Scalable, robust world models for
     continuous control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.16828, 2023.
 [4] Eloi Alonso, Adam Jelley, Vincent Micheli, Anssi Kanervisto, Amos J Storkey, Tim Pearce, and
     François Fleuret. Diffusion for world modeling: Visual details matter in atari. Advances in
     Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:58757–58791, 2024.
 [5] Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Thomas Hubert, Karen Simonyan, Laurent Sifre,
     Simon Schmitt, Arthur Guez, Edward Lockhart, Demis Hassabis, Thore Graepel, et al.
     Mastering atari, go, chess and shogi by planning with a learned model. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:1911.08265, 2019.
 [6] Matteo Hessel, Ivo Danihelka, Fabio Viola, Arthur Guez, Simon Schmitt, Laurent Sifre,
     Theophane Weber, David Silver, and Hado Van Hasselt. Muesli: Combining improvements
     in policy optimization. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 4214–4226.
     PMLR, 2021.
 [7] Philip J. Ball, Jakob Bauer, Frank Belletti, Bethanie Brownfield, Ariel Ephrat, Shlomi
     Fruchter, Agrim Gupta, Kristian Holsheimer, Aleksander Holynski, Jiri Hron, Christos Kaplanis,
     Marjorie Limont, Matt McGill, Yanko Oliveira, Jack Parker-Holder, Frank Perbet, Guy Scully,
     Jeremy Shar, Stephen Spencer, Omer Tov, Ruben Villegas, Emma Wang, Jessica Yung,
     Cip Baetu, Jordi Berbel, David Bridson, Jake Bruce, Gavin Buttimore, Sarah Chakera,
     Bilva Chandra, Paul Collins, Alex Cullum, Bogdan Damoc, Vibha Dasagi, Maxime Gazeau,
     Charles Gbadamosi, Woohyun Han, Ed Hirst, Ashyana Kachra, Lucie Kerley, Kristian Kjems,
     Eva Knoepfel, Vika Koriakin, Jessica Lo, Cong Lu, Zeb Mehring, Alex Moufarek, Henna
     Nandwani, Valeria Oliveira, Fabio Pardo, Jane Park, Andrew Pierson, Ben Poole, Helen
     Ran, Tim Salimans, Manuel Sanchez, Igor Saprykin, Amy Shen, Sailesh Sidhwani, Duncan
     Smith, Joe Stanton, Hamish Tomlinson, Dimple Vijaykumar, Luyu Wang, Piers Wingfield,
     Nat Wong, Keyang Xu, Christopher Yew, Nick Young, Vadim Zubov, Douglas Eck, Dumitru
     Erhan, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Demis Hassabis, Zoubin Gharamani, Raia Hadsell, Aäron
     van den Oord, Inbar Mosseri, Adrian Bolton, Satinder Singh, and Tim Rocktäschel. Genie
     3: A new frontier for world models. https://deepmind.google/discover/blog/
     genie-3-a-new-frontier-for-world-models/, 2025.
 [8] Yuanpeng Tu, Hao Luo, Xi Chen, Xiang Bai, Fan Wang, and Hengshuang Zhao. Playerone:
     Egocentric world simulator. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.09995, 2025.
 [9] Xianglong He, Chunli Peng, Zexiang Liu, Boyang Wang, Yifan Zhang, Qi Cui, Fei Kang, Biao
     Jiang, Mengyin An, Yangyang Ren, et al. Matrix-game 2.0: An open-source, real-time, and
     streaming interactive world model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.13009, 2025.
[10] Wenqiang Sun, Fangyun Wei, Jinjing Zhao, Xi Chen, Zilong Chen, Hongyang Zhang, Jun
     Zhang, and Yan Lu. From virtual games to real-world play. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.18901,
     2025.



                                                                                                19
[11] Yutong Bai, Danny Tran, Amir Bar, Yann LeCun, Trevor Darrell, and Jitendra Malik. Whole-
     body conditioned egocentric video prediction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.21552, 2025.
[12] Yan Team. Yan: Foundational interactive video generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.08601,
     2025.
[13] William Peebles and Saining Xie. Scalable diffusion models with transformers. In Proceedings
     of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pages 4195–4205, 2023.
[14] Boyuan Chen, Diego Martí Monsó, Yilun Du, Max Simchowitz, Russ Tedrake, and Vincent
     Sitzmann. Diffusion forcing: Next-token prediction meets full-sequence diffusion. Advances in
     Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:24081–24125, 2024.
[15] Bowen Baker, Ilge Akkaya, Peter Zhokov, Joost Huizinga, Jie Tang, Adrien Ecoffet, Brandon
     Houghton, Raul Sampedro, and Jeff Clune. Video pretraining (vpt): Learning to act by
     watching unlabeled online videos. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
     24639–24654, 2022.
[16] Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep
     unsupervised learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In International conference on
     machine learning, pages 2256–2265. pmlr, 2015.
[17] Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances
     in neural information processing systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.
[18] Yaron Lipman, Ricky TQ Chen, Heli Ben-Hamu, Maximilian Nickel, and Matt Le. Flow
     matching for generative modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02747, 2022.
[19] Xingchao Liu, Chengyue Gong, and Qiang Liu. Flow straight and fast: Learning to generate
     and transfer data with rectified flow. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.03003, 2022.
[20] Patrick Esser, Sumith Kulal, Andreas Blattmann, Rahim Entezari, Jonas Müller, Harry Saini,
     Yam Levi, Dominik Lorenz, Axel Sauer, Frederic Boesel, et al. Scaling rectified flow
     transformers for high-resolution image synthesis. In Forty-first international conference on
     machine learning, 2024.
[21] Kevin Frans, Danijar Hafner, Sergey Levine, and Pieter Abbeel. One step diffusion via shortcut
     models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.12557, 2024.
[22] Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang. The
     unreasonable effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. In Proceedings of the IEEE
     conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 586–595, 2018.
[23] Kaiming He, Xinlei Chen, Saining Xie, Yanghao Li, Piotr Dollár, and Ross Girshick. Masked
     autoencoders are scalable vision learners. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on
     computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 16000–16009, 2022.
[24] Hao Chen, Yujin Han, Fangyi Chen, Xiang Li, Yidong Wang, Jindong Wang, Ze Wang, Zicheng
     Liu, Difan Zou, and Bhiksha Raj. Masked autoencoders are effective tokenizers for diffusion
     models. In Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning, 2025.
[25] Timothée Darcet, Maxime Oquab, Julien Mairal, and Piotr Bojanowski. Vision transformers
     need registers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.16588, 2023.
[26] Diederik Kingma and Ruiqi Gao. Understanding diffusion objectives as the elbo with simple
     data augmentation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:65484–65516,
     2023.




                                                                                                20
[27] Fabian Gloeckle, Badr Youbi Idrissi, Baptiste Rozière, David Lopez-Paz, and Gabriel
     Synnaeve. Better & faster large language models via multi-token prediction. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2404.19737, 2024.
[28] Richard S Sutton. Learning to predict by the methods of temporal differences. Machine
     learning, 3(1):9–44, 1988.
[29] Abbas Abdolmaleki, Bilal Piot, Bobak Shahriari, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Tim Hertweck,
     Rishabh Joshi, Junhyuk Oh, Michael Bloesch, Thomas Lampe, Nicolas Heess, et al. Preference
     optimization as probabilistic inference. arXiv e-prints, pages arXiv–2410, 2024.
[30] Claude E Shannon. A mathematical theory of communication. Bell system technical journal, 27
     (3):379–423, 1948.
[31] A Vaswani. Attention is all you need. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2017.
[32] Biao Zhang and Rico Sennrich. Root mean square layer normalization. Advances in Neural
     Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
[33] J Su, H Zhang, X Li, J Zhang, and Y RoFormer Li. Enhanced transformer with rotary position
     embedding. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
     Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (ACL-
     IJCNLP), Association for Computational Linguistics, Online, pages 1–6, 2021.
[34] Noam Shazeer. Glu variants improve transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.05202, 2020.
[35] Mostafa Dehghani, Josip Djolonga, Basil Mustafa, Piotr Padlewski, Jonathan Heek, Justin
     Gilmer, Andreas Peter Steiner, Mathilde Caron, Robert Geirhos, Ibrahim Alabdulmohsin, et al.
     Scaling vision transformers to 22 billion parameters. In International Conference on Machine
     Learning, pages 7480–7512. PMLR, 2023.
[36] Irwan Bello, Hieu Pham, Quoc V Le, Mohammad Norouzi, and Samy Bengio. Neural
     combinatorial optimization with reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.09940,
     2016.
[37] Gemma Team, Morgane Riviere, Shreya Pathak, Pier Giuseppe Sessa, Cassidy Hardin,
     Surya Bhupatiraju, Léonard Hussenot, Thomas Mesnard, Bobak Shahriari, Alexandre Ramé,
     et al. Gemma 2: Improving open language models at a practical size. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2408.00118, 2024.
[38] Jonathan Ho, Nal Kalchbrenner, Dirk Weissenborn, and Tim Salimans. Axial attention in
     multidimensional transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.12180, 2019.
[39] Ajit Singh. Meta llama 4: The future of multimodal ai. Available at SSRN 5208228, 2025.
[40] Joshua Ainslie, James Lee-Thorp, Michiel De Jong, Yury Zemlyanskiy, Federico Lebrón, and
     Sumit Sanghai. Gqa: Training generalized multi-query transformer models from multi-head
     checkpoints. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.13245, 2023.
[41] Moo Jin Kim, Karl Pertsch, Siddharth Karamcheti, Ted Xiao, Ashwin Balakrishna, Suraj Nair,
     Rafael Rafailov, Ethan Foster, Grace Lam, Pannag Sanketi, et al. Openvla: An open-source
     vision-language-action model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.09246, 2024.
[42] Physical Intelligence, Kevin Black, Noah Brown, James Darpinian, Karan Dhabalia, Danny
     Driess, Adnan Esmail, Michael Equi, Chelsea Finn, Niccolo Fusai, et al. pi0.5: a vision-
     language-action model with open-world generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.16054,
     2025.




                                                                                                21
[43] Gemma Team, Aishwarya Kamath, Johan Ferret, Shreya Pathak, Nino Vieillard, Ramona
     Merhej, Sarah Perrin, Tatiana Matejovicova, Alexandre Ramé, Morgane Rivière, et al. Gemma
     3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.19786, 2025.
[44] Yanli Zhao, Andrew Gu, Rohan Varma, Liang Luo, Chien-Chin Huang, Min Xu, Less Wright,
     Hamid Shojanazeri, Myle Ott, Sam Shleifer, et al. Pytorch fsdp: experiences on scaling fully
     sharded data parallel. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.11277, 2023.
[45] Jeff Rasley, Samyam Rajbhandari, Olatunji Ruwase, and Yuxiong He. Deepspeed: System
     optimizations enable training deep learning models with over 100 billion parameters. In
     Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery & data
     mining, pages 3505–3506, 2020.
[46] Decart and Etched. Oasis: A universe in a transformer. https://www.decart.ai/articles/oasis-
     interactive-ai-video-game-model, 2024.
[47] Rami Seid and Alberto Hojel. Lucid v1: Real-tiem latent world models. International Journal
     of Current Research in Science, Engineering & Technology, 2024.
[48] Junliang Guo, Yang Ye, Tianyu He, Haoyu Wu, Yushu Jiang, Tim Pearce, and Jiang Bian.
     Mineworld: a real-time and open-source interactive world model on minecraft. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2504.08388, 2025.
[49] Zhiyuan Zhou, Pranav Atreya, Abraham Lee, Homer Walke, Oier Mees, and Sergey Levine.
     Autonomous improvement of instruction following skills via foundation models. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2407.20635, 2024.
[50] Thomas Unterthiner, Sjoerd Van Steenkiste, Karol Kurach, Raphaël Marinier, Marcin Michalski,
     and Sylvain Gelly. Fvd: A new metric for video generation. ICLR Workshop on Deep Generative
     Models for Highly Structured Data, 2019.
[51] Matthew Johnson, Katja Hofmann, Tim Hutton, and David Bignell. The malmo platform for
     artificial intelligence experimentation. In IJCAI, pages 4246–4247. Citeseer, 2016.
[52] William H Guss, Cayden Codel, Katja Hofmann, Brandon Houghton, Noboru Kuno, Stephanie
     Milani, Sharada Mohanty, Diego Perez Liebana, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Nicholay Topin, et al.
     The minerl competition on sample efficient reinforcement learning using human priors. arXiv
     e-prints, pages arXiv–1904, 2019.
[53] Anssi Kanervisto, Stephanie Milani, Karolis Ramanauskas, Nicholay Topin, Zichuan Lin,
     Junyou Li, Jianing Shi, Deheng Ye, Qiang Fu, Wei Yang, et al. Minerl diamond 2021
     competition: Overview, results, and lessons learned. NeurIPS 2021 Competitions and
     Demonstrations Track, pages 13–28, 2022.
[54] Ingmar Kanitscheider, Joost Huizinga, David Farhi, William Hebgen Guss, Brandon Houghton,
     Raul Sampedro, Peter Zhokhov, Bowen Baker, Adrien Ecoffet, Jie Tang, et al. Multi-task
     curriculum learning in a complex, visual, hard-exploration domain: Minecraft. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2106.14876, 2021.
[55] Shalev Lifshitz, Keiran Paster, Harris Chan, Jimmy Ba, and Sheila McIlraith. Steve-1: A
     generative model for text-to-behavior in minecraft. Advances in Neural Information Processing
     Systems, 36:69900–69929, 2023.
[56] Shaofei Cai, Bowei Zhang, Zihao Wang, Xiaojian Ma, Anji Liu, and Yitao Liang. Groot: Learning
     to follow instructions by watching gameplay videos. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08235, 2023.
[57] Enshen Zhou, Yiran Qin, Zhenfei Yin, Yuzhou Huang, Ruimao Zhang, Lu Sheng, Yu Qiao,
     and Jing Shao. Minedreamer: Learning to follow instructions via chain-of-imagination for
     simulated-world control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.12037, 2024.

                                                                                               22
[58] Juan José Nieto, Roger Creus, and Xavier Giro-i Nieto. Unsupervised skill-discovery and skill-
     learning in minecraft. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.08398, 2021.
[59] Richard S Sutton. Dyna, an integrated architecture for learning, planning, and reacting. ACM
     SIGART Bulletin, 2(4):160–163, 1991.
[60] Marc Deisenroth and Carl E Rasmussen. Pilco: A model-based and data-efficient approach to
     policy search. In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on machine learning (ICML-
     11), pages 465–472, 2011.
[61] Manuel Watter, Jost Springenberg, Joschka Boedecker, and Martin Riedmiller. Embed to
     control: A locally linear latent dynamics model for control from raw images. In Advances
     in neural information processing systems, pages 2746–2754, 2015.
[62] Chelsea Finn and Sergey Levine. Deep visual foresight for planning robot motion. In 2017 IEEE
     International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pages 2786–2793. IEEE, 2017.
[63] David Ha and Jürgen Schmidhuber. World models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.10122, 2018.
[64] Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Ian Fischer, Ruben Villegas, David Ha, Honglak Lee,
     and James Davidson. Learning latent dynamics for planning from pixels. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:1811.04551, 2018.
[65] Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Jimmy Ba, and Mohammad Norouzi. Dream to control:
     Learning behaviors by latent imagination. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.01603, 2019.
[66] Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Mohammad Norouzi, and Jimmy Ba. Mastering atari with
     discrete world models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.02193, 2020.
[67] Vincent Micheli, Eloi Alonso, and François Fleuret. Transformers are sample efficient world
     models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.00588, 2022.
[68] Jan Robine, Marc Höftmann, Tobias Uelwer, and Stefan Harmeling. Transformer-based world
     models are happy with 100k interactions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.07109, 2023.
[69] Weipu Zhang, Gang Wang, Jian Sun, Yetian Yuan, and Gao Huang. Storm: Efficient stochastic
     transformer based world models for reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information
     Processing Systems, 36:27147–27166, 2023.
[70] Jiwen Yu, Yiran Qin, Haoxuan Che, Quande Liu, Xintao Wang, Pengfei Wan, Di Zhang, Kun
     Gai, Hao Chen, and Xihui Liu. A survey of interactive generative video. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2504.21853, 2025.
[71] Dani Valevski, Yaniv Leviathan, Moab Arar, and Shlomi Fruchter. Diffusion models are real-
     time game engines. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.14837, 2024.
[72] Anthony Hu, Lloyd Russell, Hudson Yeo, Zak Murez, George Fedoseev, Alex Kendall, Jamie
     Shotton, and Gianluca Corrado. Gaia-1: A generative world model for autonomous driving.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.17080, 2023.
[73] Lloyd Russell, Anthony Hu, Lorenzo Bertoni, George Fedoseev, Jamie Shotton, Elahe Arani,
     and Gianluca Corrado. Gaia-2: A controllable multi-view generative world model for
     autonomous driving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.20523, 2025.
[74] Huiwen Chang, Han Zhang, Lu Jiang, Ce Liu, and William T Freeman. Maskgit: Masked
     generative image transformer. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision
     and pattern recognition, pages 11315–11325, 2022.
[75] Tim Salimans and Jonathan Ho. Progressive distillation for fast sampling of diffusion models.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.00512, 2022.



                                                                                                23
[76] Akio Kodaira, Tingbo Hou, Ji Hou, Masayoshi Tomizuka, and Yue Zhao. Streamdit: Real-time
     streaming text-to-video generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.03745, 2025.
[77] Yang Song, Prafulla Dhariwal, Mark Chen, and Ilya Sutskever.           Consistency models.
     International Conference on Machine Learning, 2023.
[78] Yang Song and Prafulla Dhariwal. Improved techniques for training consistency models. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2310.14189, 2023.
[79] Cheng Lu and Yang Song. Simplifying, stabilizing and scaling continuous-time consistency
     models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.11081, 2024.
[80] Xiang Wang, Shiwei Zhang, Han Zhang, Yu Liu, Yingya Zhang, Changxin Gao, and Nong Sang.
     Videolcm: Video latent consistency model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.09109, 2023.
[81] Zhengyang Geng, Mingyang Deng, Xingjian Bai, J Zico Kolter, and Kaiming He. Mean flows
     for one-step generative modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.13447, 2025.
[82] Xuanlei Zhao, Xiaolong Jin, Kai Wang, and Yang You. Real-time video generation with pyramid
     attention broadcast. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.12588, 2024.
[83] Peiyuan Zhang, Yongqi Chen, Haofeng Huang, Will Lin, Zhengzhong Liu, Ion Stoica, Eric Xing,
     and Hao Zhang. Vsa: Faster video diffusion with trainable sparse attention. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2505.13389, 2025.
[84] Dima Damen, Hazel Doughty, Giovanni Maria Farinella, Sanja Fidler, Antonino Furnari,
     Evangelos Kazakos, Davide Moltisanti, Jonathan Munro, Toby Perrett, Will Price, et al. Scaling
     egocentric vision: The epic-kitchens dataset. In Proceedings of the European conference on
     computer vision (ECCV), pages 720–736, 2018.




                                                                                                24
A. Datasets

Minecraft VPT We use the OpenAI VPT dataset of contractor gameplay 15 and combine the avail-
able subsets 6–10, resulting in 2541 hours of gameplay. We split the dataset into 90% training
and 10% evaluation data, ensuring that the splits do not share any of the same underlying 5-min
recording chunks. We encode keyboard actions as a vector of binary variables and process the mouse
actions as in VPT by 𝜇 -law encoding, discretizing into 11 bins per coordinate, and enumerating all
11 × 11 = 121 combinations to obtain a categorical variable. The image resolution is 360 × 640 and
the framerate is 20 FPS. We zero pad the frames to 384 × 640 and then patchify with patch size
16 × 16 into 960 tokens. We reshape the ( 𝑁b = 512) × ( 𝐷b = 16) bottleneck of the tokenizer to
( 𝑁z = 256) × 32 for the dynamics model. We train the dynamics model with 𝑁z = 256 spatial tokens,
context length 𝐶 = 192, and batch lengths 𝑇1 = 64 and 𝑇2 = 256.
Minecraft Overworld and Nether split To study out-of-distribution generalization of action con-
ditioning in Dreamer 4, we carefully split the Minecraft dataset into videos of the Overworld versus
the Nether dimension. We also include the End dimension into the Nether portion of the dataset.
Both the Nether and the End feature unique visuals, blocks, and terrain shapes compared to the
Overworld. The Overworld includes natural landscapes with forests, deserts, oceans, and more,
whereas the Nether is underworld-themed with red blocks and lava and the End is a space-themed
region. To separate the dataset, we want to ensure no leakage from players entering the Nether/End
dimensions and bringing blocks from there back to the Overworld. For this reason, we exclude the
VPT 6 and 7 subsets, which contain long free play. We then assigned each 5 min recording of the
remaining dataset to either the Overworld or the Nether/End portion based on item events that are
provided by the dataset. Whenever a Nether/End item was interacted with, we assign that video
to the Nether/End split. This ensures that the Overworld split contains no Nether/End episodes,
whereas the Nether/End split can sometimes contain some Overworld episodes, although this was
rare in practice. We manually investigated the Overworld split obtained by this strategy and found
no Nether/End trajectories in it.
SOAR Robotics The SOAR dataset 49 contains teleoperated demonstrations and online trajectories
of a reinforcement learning policy, thus covering both successes and failures. We split the dataset
into 90% training and 10% evaluation data. The dataset contains a total of 180 hours of videos
with 7D relative end-effector actions. The image resolution is 256 × 256 and the framerate is 5 FPS.
We patchify with patch size 16 × 16 into 256 tokens. We train the dynamics model with 𝑁z = 512
spatial tokens, context length 𝐶 = 96, and batch lengths 𝑇1 = 32 and 𝑇2 = 128.
Epic Kitchens The Epic Kitchens 100 dataset 84 contains 100 hours of video from the first-person
perspective of humans across 45 kitchens. The test set contains different tasks performed in the
same kitchens. We use the dataset at 256 × 256 resolution and 10 FPS. We patchify with patch size
16 × 16 into 256 tokens. We train the dynamics model with 𝑁z = 512 spatial tokens, context length
𝐶 = 96, and batch lengths 𝑇1 = 32 and 𝑇2 = 128.




                                                                                                 25
B. Kitchen Generations




          Figure 9: Kitchen video generations starting from holdout context.

                                                                               26
C. Minecraft Tasks

    Index   Task                               Task                            Count
     1      mine_log                           mine_log                          10
     2      mine_cobblestone                   craft_planks                      20
     3      mine_iron_ore                      craft_crafting_table               1
     4      mine_coal                          place_crafting_table               1
     5      mine_diamond                       craft_stick                        4
     6      craft_planks                       craft_wooden_pickaxe               1
     7      craft_stick                        use_wooden_pickaxe                 1
     8      craft_crafting_table               mine_cobblestone                   3
     9      craft_furnace                      craft_planks                       4
     10     craft_iron_ingot                   craft_crafting_table               1
     11     craft_wooden_pickaxe               place_crafting_table               1
     12     craft_stone_pickaxe                craft_stick                        4
     13     craft_iron_pickaxe                 craft_stone_pickaxe                1
     14     open_crafting_table                use_stone_pickaxe                  1
     15     open_furnace                       mine_iron_ore                      3
     16     place_crafting_table               mine_cobblestone                   8
     17     place_furnace                      craft_planks                       4
     18     use_wooden_pickaxe                 craft_crafting_table               1
     19     use_stone_pickaxe                  place_crafting_table               1
     20     use_iron_pickaxe                   craft_furnace                      1
                                               craft_iron_ingot                   3
Table 4: Taskset for training the multi-task   craft_stick                        2
agent.                                         craft_iron_pickaxe                 1
                                               use_iron_pickaxe                   1
                                               mine_diamond                      ∞
    Icon    Item
                                               Table 6: Prompt sequence for evaluation.
            Log
            Planks
            Stick
            Crafting table
            Wooden pickaxe
            Cobblestone
            Stone pickaxe
            Iron ore
            Furnace
            Iron ingot
            Iron pickaxe
            Diamond

Table 5: Milestone items used for measuring
progress during evaluation.
                                                                                          27
D. Offline Diamond Challenge




                                                                           )
                                  )




                                                                         task
                              ined




                                                                                                 a 3)
                                                ed)




                                                                      (no
                                             tun




                                                                                               mm
                              etra




                                                               )
                                                          task




                                                                                                                  er 4
                                            e




                                                                     BC




                                                                                                          C
                                                                                           (Ge
                                        (fin
                          ( pr




                                                                                                         +B


                                                                                                                   am
                                                      (no



                                                                      +
                                                                   WM




                                                                                          VLA



                                                                                                        WM
                        VPT



                                       VPT




                                                                                                               Dre
                                                      BC




                                                                                   BC
  Item
  Log                    81.9          84.3           71.4         92.6            97.3   98.5          99.6    99.1
  Planks                 30.6          65.3           68.6         91.6            95.7   98.3          99.6    98.9
  Crafting table          1.7           4.7           63.8         90.6            93.5   97.2          99.1    98.5
  Stick                  30.3          52.6           62.4         90.1            95.0   97.7          98.9    98.7
  Wooden pickaxe          0.0           0.0           33.8         77.3            86.5   94.1          97.3    96.6
  Cobblestone             4.8           6.9           32.0         77.4            83.9   91.6          97.2    95.9
  Stone pickaxe           0.0           0.0            8.8         38.4            53.8   76.7          89.4    90.1
  Iron ore                0.1           0.1            3.6         22.0            26.5   46.3          62.9    66.7
  Furnace                 0.0           0.0            4.0         28.0            16.2   42.4          51.1    58.1
  Iron ingot              0.1           0.1            0.2          1.2             4.3   22.5          27.8    39.5
  Iron pickaxe            0.0           0.0            0.0          0.1             0.6   11.2          16.9    29.0
  Diamond                 0.0           0.0            0.0          0.0             0.0    0.0           0.0     0.7

Table 7: Success rates for each milestone item averaged over 1000 evaluation episodes. Scores
within 5% of the highest recorded score are highlighted in bold.
                                                                               )
                                   )




                                                                          task
                              ined




                                                                                                a 3)
                                                ed)




                                                                      (no
                                             tun




                                                                                               mm
                            etra




                                                               )
                                                          task




                                                                                                                    4
                                            e




                                                                                                                 mer
                                                                     BC




                                                                                                          C
                                                                                           (Ge
                                        (fin
                          ( pr




                                                                                                          +B
                                                      (no



                                                                      +




                                                                                                                   a
                                                                   WM




                                                                                          VLA



                                                                                                        WM
                        VPT



                                       VPT




                                                                                                               Dre
                                                      BC




                                                                                   BC




  Item
  Log                     9.1           6.3           11.9          5.4             1.8    2.2           1.2     0.9
  Planks                 25.2          14.2           12.2          5.9             4.3    3.4           2.1     2.0
  Stick                  32.0          24.0           13.3          6.7             6.4    5.0           3.1     2.9
  Crafting table         41.4          27.5           17.1          8.0             9.5    7.2           4.6     4.4
  Wooden pickaxe         —             —              18.8         11.6            11.4    9.8           5.7     5.0
  Cobblestone            —             —              19.6         12.7            13.3   12.1           6.7     5.6
  Stone pickaxe          —             —              23.5         15.7            15.8   14.5           8.9     6.7
  Iron ore               —             —              28.9         17.5            20.9   23.5          14.3     9.9
  Furnace                —             —              29.4         19.7            24.5   24.7          16.1    11.0
  Iron ingot             —             —              —            30.5            28.8   30.8          17.2    12.4
  Iron pickaxe           —             —              —            —               29.1   31.1          17.0    13.3
  Diamond                —             —              —            —               —      —             —       20.7

Table 8: Time in minutes needed for reaching each milestone item, averaged over successful
episodes. We omit timings for items below a success rate of 0.5% to ensure statistical significance.
Scores within 5% of the fastest recorded score are highlighted in bold.

                                                                                                                         28
   E. Minecraft Inputs




       (a) Dreamer 3 (64×64)         (b) VPT (128×128)                (c) Dreamer 4 (360×640)

   Figure 10: Comparison of input images for different agents. Dreamer 4 learns directly from high-
   resolution images reflecting the experience of human players.



   F. Previous Dreamer Generations
   Dreamer 3 1 learned to obtain diamonds in Minecraft from scratch by online interaction. Its in-
   puts are low-resolution images and inventory states and the outputs are mouse, keyboard, and ab-
   stract crafting actions. Dreamer 3 uses a recurrent state-space model (RSSM) 64 as its world model,
   which is based on a recurrent neural network and a variational objective. This approach results
   in a lightweight world model with highly efficient inference but is difficult to scale to diverse data
   distributions. In contrast, Dreamer 4 learns to obtain diamonds in Minecraft purely from offline
   data. Its inputs are only high-resolution images and the outputs are low-level mouse and keyboard
   actions. Dreamer 4 uses a scalable world model based on an efficient transformer architecture and a
   shortcut forcing objective, allowing it to scale to diverse data distributions with many details. While
   Dreamer 3 uses return normalization and an entropy regularizer, Dreamer 4 uses PMPO with a KL
   to the behavioral cloning prior for imagination training, where no normalization is needed.
Dreamer 4
Dreamer 3




                                              Time
            Figure 11: Comparison of multi-step video generations between Dreamer 3 and Dreamer 4.

                                                                                                       29
G. Human Interaction: Lucid-v1

Task              Generation
Eat apple

Place
three
torches

Chop tree

Dig 3x3
pit with
shovel
Craft
wooden
pickaxe
Use
furnace
and exit
Place and
open
workbench
Kill
zombies

Mine
diamonds

Complete
window

Place and
ride boat

Enter
portal
Place door
and walk
outside
Place bed
in house
and sleep
Plant reed
and pour
water
Turn 360
and enter
house
                               Figure 12: Lucid-v1

                                                     30
H. Human Interaction: OASIS (large)

Task              Generation
Eat apple

Place
three
torches

Chop tree

Dig 3x3
pit with
shovel
Craft
wooden
pickaxe
Use
furnace
and exit
Place and
open
workbench
Kill
zombies

Mine
diamonds

Complete
window

Place and
ride boat

Enter
portal
Place door
and walk
outside
Place bed
in house
and sleep
Plant reed
and pour
water
Turn 360
and enter
house
                           Figure 13: Oasis (large)

                                                      31
I. Human Interaction: Dreamer 4

Task             Generation
Eat apple

Place
three
torches

Chop tree

Dig 3x3
pit with
shovel
Craft
wooden
pickaxe
Use
furnace
and exit
Place and
open
workbench
Kill
zombies

Mine
diamonds

Complete
window

Place and
ride boat

Enter
portal
Place door
and walk
outside
Place bed
in house
and sleep
Plant reed
and pour
water
Turn 360
and enter
house
                              Figure 14: Dreamer 4

                                                     32
